Requirements (#121)
WebAssembly/gc: Requirements.md

## Goals

1. Support for host-provided GC

   Allow language implementers to use host-provided GC features as their primary means of supporting memory management. 
   
   On the whole, it would be preferable if language implementers could target WASM-GC as a natural target for their language. While it is difficult to be precise about this, an ideal scenario would be that language implementers could target WASM-GC as though it were just another back-end. In particular, targeting WASM-GC should try to avoid requiring changes to earlier stages of a compiler - such as the type checker or source-level transformations.
   
### Non-Goals
1. Support for linear memory GC.

   We do not attempt with this proposal to support alternate memory management strategies that rely on collecting linear memory.
   
## Criteria

A criterion is intended to act as a metric of a 'soft value', such as 'desireability' or 'implementability'. Criteria are especially important when weighing the relative merits of features and in determining the importance that some scenario is satisfied.

> 1. Prioriterize popular languages.

Reviewer: > In particular, I'm sure we do not want to end up producing yet another OO-specific engine

The Lumen team is on the CG for this reason.  We wanted to make sure that Erlang/Elixir and more generally, functional languages would have good support in WASM.

> 1. Prioriterize popular languages.

Author: @rossberg 

>In particular, I'm sure we do not want to end up producing yet another OO-specific engine,

While I would personally be quite happy to see OO languages disappear, that is not going to happen; in part because it is not in our control. In fact, new OO languages are still being invented...

OTOH, that does not mean that WASM(-GC) should/must end up as an OO-specific engine. It simply means that WASM(-GC) must be seen as a friendly target for OO language compiler authors.

> 1. Prioriterize popular languages.

Reviewer 2: @fgmccabe
>  It simply means that WASM(-GC) must be seen as a friendly target for OO language compiler authors.

No disagreement there. However, I get the rather concerning impression that many of the recent discussions reinterpret "being friendly" as "specialising for". It has to be equally friendly to others.

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Reviewer 3: TIOBE is probably pseudoscience, and in any case popularity is a very coarse metric since we don't know anything about the context for the popularity.  No doubt Java and C# and Ruby and PHP and Go are popular, but as server languages, sometimes on application servers where there may be no good options.  More relevant seems to be whether the language is a good fit for the client-side web (yes there are other domains, but it might be good to focus), whether there is existing code in the language that will be ported to the web (including libraries), and whether new code might be written in the language for the web.

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Reviewer 2: For better or worse, Perl, Swift and Matlab use RC. So do PHP and Python, at least primarily, although they have fallback GCs to deal with cycles. It's not clear if either of them would easily benefit from Wasm GC. Visual Basic is a sibling CLR language to C#. So the above list can probably be thinned to 3 relevant representatives: Java/JVM, C#/CLR, Go. That misses out on many other GC'ed languages. I'm surprised JS is not on the list, though.

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Reviewer 4: PHP has destructors on objects which must be called at the expected times, so would need to use explicit ref counting to preserve language semantics. Relying on Wasm GC to handle cycle collection wouldn't work either as it would not have a way to call destructors (no finalization support is planned yet).

JS seems mostly implementable on the various plans I've seen except for `WeakMap` which requires weak references that no proposal has included yet, and typed arrays which cannot perform fast multi-byte accesses using any proposal I've seen yet. (However implementing JS in a fast way requires run-time profiling, tiered JIT compilation, and a way to hack up some kind of on-stack replacement. My implementation sketch plans only for a baseline compiler with expected middling performance.)

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Reviewer: Erlang uses a mix of per Erlang process (green thread) heaps that are individually collected, but for large shared binaries (byte vectors), they are stored globally with a reference count and there is pointer to them in the process heaps.

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Reviewer 5: Monthly active users on github could be an interesting metric, because a lot of the code on github is web-related: https://www.benfrederickson.com/ranking-programming-languages-by-github-users/
TLDR: 1. JavaScript 2. Python 3. Java 4. PHP 5. C# 6.Go 7. TypeScript 8. Ruby 9. Jupyter Notebook 10. Objective-C 11. Swift 12. Kotlin 13. R 14. Scala 15. Lua 16. Matlab 17. CoffeeScript 18. Perl 19. Groovy 20. Haskell
I omitted languages that do not have a GC (C, C++, Rust) or that are clearly just there to implement command-line scripts (Shell, PowerShell).
CoffeeScript and Typescript can be collapsed into JavaScript.

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Reviewer 6: Speaking of "importance" of approaches of different languages, I'd like to point out a pretty strong trend to *transpile a given language down to C or LLVM IR or similar high-level representation*. Such language has more often than not a **garbage collector**. Such languages eagerly seek ways how to make them more performant in WASM runtimes without much effort. And **swapping** their garbage collectors for WASM GC (with some tiny shim layer) seems like a low hanging fruit.

I'm speaking of Nim, Go (cgo etc.), Rust, Crystal, etc. I think they're not that important, but it won't hurt to keep this approach in mind too while writing the requirements.

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Reviewer 7: These lists of programming languages from teh internets may give a *rough* impression of the landscape we are dealing with today, but how wise it is to prioritize on such a rough list that will be updated again next year and might look completely different in ten years? Shouldn't we instead prioritize on things we actually do know, like that JS will still be the primary interop target in browsers in ten years, that it is safe to assume that Java is the ideal candidate for Wasm GC (like C was the ideal candidate for the Wasm MVP), and that we also want to support functional languages well, just like there are tail calls for a reason, and that there'll likely be both nominal and structural type systems involved? An arbitrary listing will very likely just yield a never ending and perfectly justified stream of discussion (like this one) on the metrics used and, even worse, fuel disunion between the group, which we should strive to avoid.

Much of this thread then boils down to whether an individual language runtime may switch from RC or other 
more sophisticated (arena) collection strategies to a fire-and-forget kind of GC interface, which I'd assume the answer for is yes because it is much simpler, given that often necessary functionality like finalization can be provided. I'm certainly oversimplifying here, but how far this assumption does hold would be an interesting discussion to have.

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Author: I think that there may be a misconception about having the explicit list of languages. We are not actually in the business of ranking these languages. Think of it as a criterion: if a language is not significantly popular, then it's demands are going to have to take a back seat relative to languages that are more popular. In most cases, this is unlikely to change the technical outcome; since at this level of abstraction, most languages have a lot in common (thanks Von Neumann).

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Reviewer 7: My argument was that this is unnecessary bike shedding involving risks for the community that go far beyond the questionably benefits of using a ranked list (something "We are not actually in the business of") as a criterion, and I am suggesting better metrics already available to us that can be used to avoid that. You ignored that part in its entirety, so I guess you agree?

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Author: I do think that the main point is important: we need to focus on the popular languages.

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Reviewer 2: > I do think that the main point is important: we need to focus on the popular languages.

While not entirely false, it's rather dangerous to take that too far. It's at least as important that we don't overspecialise, don't prematurely optimise, and thereby lose the broader goal. Popularity is neither a scientific nor a stable criterion. Can we state a suitable requirement somehow without referring to dubious notions like that, or including an outdated list?

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Reviewer 5: I do believe it is extremely important to get some of the underrepresented language folks involved.

I don't believe WASM necessarily needs to prioritize features for popular languages, but it is a critical success factor to make sure they can run better on WASM than via translation to Javascript.

Currently, some of the most popular languages are underrepresented and, consequently, under-discussed. That obviously needs to change.

>    When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages; while it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the TIOBE index. The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.

Author: Am including two sources of 'popularity'

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Reviewer 8: The fundamental goal of prioritizing by language popularity is to maximize value for the WebAssembly ecosystem in the utilitarian sense. Language popularity is really just a proxy that lets us predict how much a particular language will be used with WebAssembly, but of course there are other factors as well, such as how interested the language maintainers are in targeting WebAssembly and how interested Web developers will be in using it. @fgmccabe, how would you feel about adding additional language after "We prioritize support for the popular programming languages" to be inclusive of additional languages that will have an outsized impact on the WebAssembly ecosystem? Possible additions might be:

 - "... and languages that appeal to Web developers"
 - "... and languages designed to interoperate with JavaScript"
 - "... and languages with strong interest in targeting WebAssembly"

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Reviewer: Elixir and Erlang are not even in the top 50 according to TIOBE 😢 , but [Lumen](https://github.com/lumen/lumen) (our Elixir/Erlang ahead-of-time compiler) is built on top of Rust, so if I can use it from RustI can just wrap that.

> how interested the language maintainers are in targeting WebAssembly

We've been members of the CG for over a year

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Reviewer 8: @KronicDeth can you elaborate on how you would like to be able to use the GC proposal from Rust? I think it is unlikely that LLVM will support the GC proposal at all, except perhaps in its assembly format.

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Reviewer: @tlively we would like to get away from the JS shim as much as possible. Right now we expect to still lean on rustwasm for the JS shim generation or something similar, but Lumen is directly compiling the Erlang itself using LLVM and then linking in the runtime, which is written in Rust.  If we have a DOM resource, we'd like to interact with them through this proposal and/or Interface Types if possible to eliminate the shimming.

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Reviewer 8: You may need to use a non-LLVM code generation backend if you aim to compile the entire language to the GC proposal. Would that be a deal breaker for you? If you only use the GC proposal for JS interop, it might be possible to use LLVM for your main codegen and link in some separately-generated bridge layer between the linear memory LLVM code and the GC interop code. It's not clear where that bridge code would come from or what it would look like, though, or whether using a GC proposal in that model would have any benefit over just using reference types.

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Reviewer: We're using LLVM so that we can build on top of MLIR and LLVM for the native compile target too.  We want to be able to target WASM, desktop/server, and embedded easily and LLVM gave us that.   I can't see switching the backend for GC as it is unlikely that generic WASM GC will be as useful as the GC that understands our type layout the way the one we wrote it.  It is more that we can interact correctly with stuff from Web APIs.

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Reviewer 8: > it is unlikely that generic WASM GC will be as useful as the GC that understands our type layout the way the one we wrote it. It is more that we can interact correctly with stuff from Web APIs.

If this is a common viewpoint among language implementors, the GC proposal will have failed. It would be helpful to understand in depth how the current proposal falls short of your needs and what it would take to fix that.

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Reviewer 9: @tlively I don't think it is quite that simple. Yes, a generic GC cannot ever cover all the functionality all specialized GCs that currently exist rely on, that is an impossible design exercise, so in that sense the Wasm GC will indeed fail. That said, there will be lots of new languages, languages without too strict performance requirements, language that needed to be reimplemented for Wasm anyway that will be very well served by the Wasm GC.

tl;dr: The Wasm ecosystem will be stronger with a generic Wasm GC, even if it doesn't serve everyone perfectly. But we should also take features for those that need to create their own GC in linear memory seriously.

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Reviewer: Erlang GCs way more often than I think a browser's GC is expecting most languages to GC.  In Erlang, each Erlang Process GCs only its own heap and we've already done tests where a single browser tab can support 64k Erlang processes.  A lot of times an Erlang process may never actually GC and instead only throw out it's whole heap when done.  (This is one of the reasons why Erlang calls it a "process" - it is isolated and you can just throw away the memory to free it when done like an OS process.)  Because the processes can send message to each other there are also HeapFragments for messages sitting in the timer system that can maybe be thought of as global, but all the terms in one HeapFragment are in each HeapFragment.  I'm expecting that the GC proposal is going to think in terms of GC for the entire thread/tab in a browser, so GCing one Erlang process will GC and lock the whole tab in some way.  If I'm wrong about this interpretation, let me know.

If LLVM is never going to support this GC proposal and If it is a trade-off between using LLVM to get all the code optimizations and using MLIR to get transparentish SIMD support, we're going to favor using LLVM than getting a GC, but having to lower from our IR to WASM directly.  We really want to avoid WASM being a vastly different target for the lowering.  That's one of these reasons we're pushing for stack switching because we do stack switching for x86_64 desktop/server.

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Reviewer 8: > That said, there will be lots of new languages, languages without too strict performance requirements, language that needed to be reimplemented for Wasm anyway that will be very well served by the Wasm GC.

My understanding is that we want the GC proposal to be usable by performance-sensitive languages with minimal changes to their existing compilers, but that should certainly be clarified in this requirements doc.

> If LLVM is never going to support this GC proposal and If it is a trade-off between using LLVM to get all the code optimizations and using MLIR to get transparentish SIMD support, we're going to favor using LLVM than getting a GC, but having to lower from our IR to WASM directly. We really want to avoid WASM being a vastly different target for the lowering.

We might be able to find a third option where we build an LLVM-like API on top of Binaryen. That would let you treat it very similarly to the LLVM backend and you would still get optimizations, but you would also be able to use GC and other proposals that don't fit well into LLVM.

But if Erlang is happy to use its own GC and it can't form cycles with JS (you said in a separate thread that Erlang doesn't have cycles), then what's still missing from the reference types proposal for JS interop? Is it the ability to pass Erlang objects out and use them from JS?

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Reviewer: > Is it the ability to pass Erlang objects out and use them from JS?

We don't currently have a story for transparent usage of Erlang types outside of the Lumen module.  For Rust `wasm_bindgen_test` we have a function that converts the Erlang types to sorta equivalents in JS, but Erlang has tuples and JS doesn't and JS has no concept of a PID (Process IDentifier, used to interact with a process from another process), so it's not transparent and not a safe thing where we know we can accept it back in from JS.  We brainstormed about doing something tricky with Proxies in JS to make it Just Work™️ , but haven't prototyped it.

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Author: @KronicDeth 

> Erlang GCs way more often than I think a browser's GC is expecting most languages to GC. In Erlang, each Erlang Process GCs only its own heap and we've already done tests where a single browser tab can support 64k Erlang processes. 

I think that this does suggest a requirement that I had in the back of my mind: support for multiple GC memories; to follow from the core WASM multiple memory proposal.
However, 64K different memories is significantly more than the authors of that proposal were thinking, I believe!

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Author: @tlively 

> My understanding is that we want the GC proposal to be usable by performance-sensitive languages with minimal changes to their existing compiler

There seems to be a significant tension here. On the one hand, a highly performing compiler 'knows' how to express desired optimizations and it behooves the WASM to get out of the way and let it rip. OTOH, the WASM engine exists in a context that may contradict the smart compiler's assumptions. 

I believe the answer to this is @titzer's idea of layering. Let the compiler lower their language to a point where the engine can straightforwardly take over.

At the risk of incurring @sabine's wrath, this probably means that tagged pointers are not the way forward - because the risk of clashing with the WASM engine's existing context is too high.

>    Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.

Reviewer 5: First off, I'm not going to be angry if tagged pointers don't exist in WASM GC.

OCaml needs a reasonably efficient mechanism that allows storing either a reference or a scalar in the same field of a heap struct, and checking at runtime, which of the two a value is.

If we knew for certain that linear memory GC will be supported eventually, we could focus our efforts on that, instead of trying to push for a heap model that works for us.

   
1. Security is more important than architectural integrity.

> 1. Architectural integrity is more important than performance.

Reviewer 8: This is only true beyond a certain point, since the whole proposal is worthless if it can't provide better performance (by any metric) than 1) compiling to JavaScript and 2) Compiling to WebAssembly without GC. I think that calling out those baselines explicitly would be useful.

   'Architectural Integrity' is intended to denote simplicity/coherence of design. Generally speaking, architectural integrity can be measured in terms of the number of concepts and the complexity of their relationships.
   
   The more complex an architecture is, the harder it will be to extend or to modify; this, in turn, inhibits our ability to extend WASM-GC with new features.
   
   We prioriterize simple, composeable architectures over solution-oriented architectures. This will help to ensure that WASM-GC can evolove and be part of future WASM evolution.
   
   Our reasoning here is that performance is often the result of progressive tuning of an implementation. It can typically be improved over time. On the other hand, architectural deficiencies are very difficult to correct.
      
1. Performance is more important than convenience.

>    Since WASM-GC is not intended as a user-facing technology, convenience here refers to the ease with which toolchain authors can target WASM-GC. 

Reviewer 8: Maybe this point should be more about the non-goal of having the syntax of the proposal be similar to familiar syntax in source languages. That's what being a non-user-facing technology means to me, at least. I'm biased of course, but I think it is important that toolchain authors be able to target Wasm GC easily.

Author: In fact, I think that 'convenience' for tool chain authors is pretty important. It affects the ease of adoption of WASM technology.

   
   Convenience for toolchain authors is still important however, as that affects adoption of WASM-GC. 

   
## Critical Success Factors

A critical success factor is an aspect or property of possible solutions that may or may not be directly focused on the primary objective, but none-the-less is estimated to be crucially important to the success of the effort.

> 1. Permit ‘cycle detection’ between host structures and language structures; so that such cycles can be collected if there are no other references to them.

Reviewer 8: This seems non-negotiable. Should it be a goal rather than a critical success factor?

Author: The role of CSF is to identify those 'must haves' that are necessary for success. This is the appropriate slot for this, I believe.
Terminology is a tough space; but one breakdown is:
Goal = Desired state of affairs; but not necessarily measurable (e.g., safer world)
Requirement = Measurable attribute
CSF = Requirement that must be satisfied.

   When a WASM-GC module accesses host capabilities, or when a host application access structures from a WASM-GC library, cross references between them are likely to be established. For example, a DOM node may have an event listener that is actually implemented in WASM. The event listener, in turn, may have a reference to the DOM node it is listening to. This represents a cycle between the host and WASM-GC. If there are no other references to this cycles (if, for example, the DOM node is removed) then the entire cycle must be able to be collected.

> 1. Performance implications of WASM-GC code should be straightforward.

Reviewer 8: I think it is uncontroversial that as much optimization as possible should happen in toolchains rather than in engines. That being said, in practice different engines will have different performance profiles based on their complexity budget. For example, interpreters will always be slower and simpler than streaming compilers, which will always be slower and simpler than optimizing compilers.

The open question here is whether we want to allow for engines that have a higher complexity budget than the Web engines to be able to attain higher performance than web engines by e.g. allowing optimizing toolchains to provide low-level memory layout or tagging scheme hints that would be ignored by Web engines.

Reviewer 10: I think it may be worth drilling into the term "performance" a bit, as it clearly has several aspects, including at least:

- "baseline performance", i.e. the performance that an engine with a low complexity budget might achieve, or the startup latency focused first tier of an optimizing multi-tier engine, or the fallback case of a selectively optimizing engine.
- "peak performance", i.e. the maximum performance that a complex, optimizing engine might achieve for long-running code, using strategies such as textbook compiler optimizations, dynamic feedback collection and JIT specialization, etc.
- "predictable performance", i.e. lack of performance variance across different engines, or for "minor" changes to the Wasm code, or other factors. A very strict version of this is often called "constant performance", which really _prevents_ engines from applying optimizations even if they could.

Different design decisions might impact only one of these aspects, or benefit one at the cost of another. Also, note that the lines can be a bit blurry, and/or there can be some confusion: someone who says "I want predictable performance" might actually mean "I want good baseline performance".

Which aspect does "performance implications should be straightforward" refer to?

In various discussions here the principle "Wasm should not require JIT-compilation to achieve good performance" has been brought up (the paragraph below about "special implementation techniques" may be a generalization of that notion). Personally, I'd assume that this specifically means "... good _baseline_ performance", and that it may be quite acceptable to have features where current state of the art is to achieve maximum performance for them by using adaptive JIT-compilation, as long as non-JIT baseline performance is also decent -- though I am aware that this assumption might not reflect wider consensus, so might be a good candidate for clarifying in this Requirements document.

Reviewer 8: Personally, I've been assuming that we are designing to optimize peak performance for optimizing engines that will not do dynamic feedback collection. I agree that it would be helpful to check for consensus on what design constraints we are assuming for the top-tier of engines we are designing for.

   A general principle behind WASM itself is that performance should not require special implementation techniques on the part of the engine. I.e., it should not be required that the engine discover particular opportunities for improving performance. In particular, it is the responsibility of languages implementers to generate WASM-GC code that embodies performant strategies.
   
   For example, if a type cast is potentially eliminatable, then the engine should not be required to discover that fact; rather the toolchain should be able to eliminate the type cast.
   

> 1. Support code migration.

Reviewer 8: I agree that it would be useful to have a more detailed picture of what a code migration story would look like.

> 1. Support code migration.

Author: @tlively 

> I agree that it would be useful to have a more detailed picture of what a code migration story would look like.

There is going to have to be a balance, obviously. At one extreme, a single JS expression could be 'replaced' by a call to a WASM function; at the other extreme, the minimum unit of migration is a module.

More likely, the issue will revolve around the kinds of access and the kinds of structure that must be supported.

@brion
>this requires either that Wasm GC objects be implemented as JavaScript objects,

IMPO, if we end up at this place, the entire enterprise risks losing out to another CSF: that WASM be demonstrably better as a target than JS.

Without prejudice, one possible scenario would have JS being able to access WASM objects that are wrapped and that the language running on WASM would be able to access JS objects through a similar wrapping layer that is specfic to the language. This, in turn, likely rules out some of the wilder forms of modification that JS programs are capable of (like messing directly with prototype chains).

> 1. Support code migration.

Author: I think that one way of squaring the interoperability circle is to make explicit (a) that objects may be shared -- in the sense that a change of state by one party is directly observable by other parties and (b) not all the state associated with an entity needs to be observable by all parties.

   This refers to a potential code migration strategy; where an application starts as a JavaScript code base (say), and is then progressively migrated to another language (hosted on WASM-GC). During this migration process, individual functions and modules may be ported from JavaScript whilst the remaining codebase remains in JavaScript. 
   Interoperability between WASM-GC code and JavaScript is critical for the success of this strategy; in particular, structures defined in one language may need to be accessed by another.

>    Code Migration itself is a CSF because it underlies a realistic assumption about porting libraries and applications to WASM-GC.

Reviewer 8: What is that assumption?

Author: Actual migration happens incrementally. That implies that, at least during the migration, there will be a mix of new code and old code. 
Depending on the size of the code base, migration can take from a few days to several years.

> 1. Support code migration.
> 
>    This refers to a potential code migration strategy; where an application starts as a JavaScript code base (say), and is then progressively migrated to another language (hosted on WASM-GC). During this migration process, individual functions and modules may be ported from JavaScript whilst the remaining codebase remains in JavaScript. 
>    Interoperability between WASM-GC code and JavaScript is critical for the success of this strategy; in particular, structures defined in one language may need to be accessed by another.
>    Code Migration itself is a CSF because it underlies a realistic assumption about porting libraries and applications to WASM-GC.

Reviewer 7: To make a concrete suggestion addressing all of my concerns:

```suggestion
1. Excellent, fast interoperability with JavaScript and Web APIs

   With JavaScript and Web APIs (the existing Web Platform) as the de facto primary interoperability target of Wasm GC in browsers, designing the interaction between Wasm GC and the existing Web Platform to be frictionless is a CSF as it underlies realistic assumptions about

   * Progressively migrating (parts of) an existing JavaScript codebase to one or multiple (domain-specific) Wasm GC-enabled languages
   * Writing new libraries utilizing Wasm GC-enabled languages to integrate into an existing JavaScript codebase
   * Writing new applications in Wasm GC-enabled languages interacting with Web APIs exclusively
   
   Excellent interoperability between Wasm GC and the Web Platform is critical for the success of these and other strategies and use cases; in particular, strings, arrays, sets, maps and structured objects defined in one language or constructed by a browser may need to be accessed by another language or be consumed by a browser in the absence of sizable and/or inefficient glue code.
```

> 1. Support code migration.
> 
>    This refers to a potential code migration strategy; where an application starts as a JavaScript code base (say), and is then progressively migrated to another language (hosted on WASM-GC). During this migration process, individual functions and modules may be ported from JavaScript whilst the remaining codebase remains in JavaScript. 
>    Interoperability between WASM-GC code and JavaScript is critical for the success of this strategy; in particular, structures defined in one language may need to be accessed by another.
>    Code Migration itself is a CSF because it underlies a realistic assumption about porting libraries and applications to WASM-GC.

Reviewer 7: To make a concrete suggestion addressing all of my concerns:

```suggestion
1. Excellent, fast interoperability with JavaScript and Web APIs

   With JavaScript and Web APIs (the existing Web Platform) as the de facto primary interoperability target of Wasm GC in browsers, designing the interaction between Wasm GC and the existing Web Platform to be frictionless is a CSF as it underlies realistic assumptions about

   * Progressively migrating (parts of) an existing JavaScript codebase to one or multiple (domain-specific) Wasm GC-enabled languages
   * Writing new libraries utilizing Wasm GC-enabled languages to integrate into an existing JavaScript codebase
   * Writing new applications in Wasm GC-enabled languages interacting with Web APIs exclusively
   
   Excellent interoperability between Wasm GC and the Web Platform is critical for the success of these and other strategies and use cases; in particular, strings, arrays, sets, maps and structured objects defined in one language or constructed by a browser may need to be accessed by another language or be consumed by a browser in the absence of sizable and/or inefficient glue code.
```

Reviewer 11: These items are complementary. For example, WebAssembly/design#1345 gave a design that provided better JS interop but at the cost of code migration. That is, if library A and library B spoke to each other, WebAssembly/design#1345 would work fine if just one of the two migrated to WebAssembly, but it broke down if both of them migrated (as in the behavior of the programs composed together changed significantly).

So I would prefer your suggestion as taking the current second bullet of Code Migration and elaborating it into its own item (which seems worthwhile to do).

On a separate note, I'm not really sure what the final sentence phrase (after the semicolon) is saying. It seems like the sort of thing that is more detailed than necessary for this sort of document.

Reviewer 7: Not particularly attached to the exact wording or structure, as long as it still covers excellent and fast interop. I agree that some of this can be considered as too specific, but thought I add these concerns to raise awareness, since these remained unaddressed elsewhere and are relevant. For instance, there's no meaningful interop with Web APIs if there isn't at least a story for strings, and largish or inefficient glue code will never be fast.

Btw I expect WebAssembly/design#1345 to resurface eventually. Unless we decide to cheap out on interop with the Web of course, then the whole ship is going to sink anyway.

Reviewer 11: Sounds good.

> Btw I expect WebAssembly/design#1345 to resurface eventually.

It's on the agenda for tomorrow in fact 😃

> ## Requirements

Author: See section on phased release.

1. Support for typical memory layouts employed by languages like Java/C#/Kotlin.

1. Support for V-tables for object layout.

> 1. Support for embedded arrays.

Author: Phasing is a separate consideration.

   Many languages use a combined structure consisting of a fixed set of fields together with an array. This is, for example, how arrays themselves are realized in languages like Java.
   
   Potentially restricted to a single embedded array.
   
1. Support for parametric polymorphic types.

>    Specifically, support for languages that support parametric type polymorphism; and subtype polymorphism. 

Reviewer 8: Probably just changing "Support for parametric polymorphic types" to "Support for languages with parametric polymorphic types" would be sufficient clarification.

>    Specifically, support for languages that support parametric type polymorphism; and subtype polymorphism. 

Author: Actually, I am not sure about this. We are referring to the representation of data. It is theoretically possible to have a polymorphic source language not use polymorphic data representation and vice versa: a non-polymorphic language may wish to implement some form of structure sharing via polymorphism.

   The primary task of the WASM type system is to be able to reliably and securely identify the representations of values. As such, it is not clear that WASM's type system needs to be polymorphic. However, many statically typed languages are polymorphic, and there are multiple strategies for realizing them -- from a so-called uniform representation (for representing parametric types) to compile-time monomorphization.
   

### Non-Requirements
1. Arbitrary interoperability between different languages on the wasm.
   While it may be tempting to try to support arbitrary interoperability across languages -- by enabling cross language access to data structures in the case of WASM-GC -- this is fraught with many difficulties; not the least of which are caused by those languages themselves.
   The task of WASM-GC is to enable managed languages to represent their structures in such a way as can be managed by the host. This does not imply interoperability between languages or between languages and the host.
1. Arbitrary interoperability with host.
   Similar to the above issue.
1. Permit access to host data structures from wasm, and vice versa.

>    While it may be desireable to support access to host structures from wasm, and access to wasm structures from the host, it is not the goal of WASM-GC to support this.

Author: @dcodeIO: 

> But at least WebAssembly and JavaScript must work well together, right, so why not just write down the obvious?

This is not at all obvious IMO. I phrased it in the document as supporting code migration; because that is a clear use case.

The fundamental issue is that there is a semantic mismatch (only one?) between JS and WASM: JS is a user facing programming language and WASM is only ever the target of compilers.

What that means is that we cannot reasonably talk about WASM<->JS interop; we must talk about XX<->JS interop, where XX is one of many languages that compile to WASM. 

Simple example, JS supports named fields of objects that can have dynamically installed getters and setters. Not all languages support named fields, and not all languages (pretty few actually) support dynamically installed getters and setters.

>    While it may be desireable to support access to host structures from wasm, and access to wasm structures from the host, it is not the goal of WASM-GC to support this.

Reviewer 7: > What that means is that we cannot reasonably talk about WASM<->JS interop; we must talk about XX<->JS interop, where XX is one of many languages that compile to WASM.

But good XX<->(Wasm_compiler_target<->)JS_user_facing_programming_language interop will only be a viable endeavour if there is good Wasm<->JS interop to start with, no matter if XX is already reasonably JS compatible or decides to build additional abstractions because they see advantages in doing so. What's "not at all obvious" about that?

## Phased Release

> It is unlikely that WASM-GC will be released as a single version. A more approachable strategy involves releasing subsets of the final proposal over time. 

Reviewer 8: On the other hand, we have always had a long roadmap of upcoming proposals that has been helpful for contextualizing more immediate proposals. It will be useful to have at least sketches of how we are planning to extend GC support so that we don't design ourselves into a corner.

> It is unlikely that WASM-GC will be released as a single version. A more approachable strategy involves releasing subsets of the final proposal over time. 

Author: There is a meta-goal being established here (or is a meta-meta-goal?)
We are establishing both the need for phasing, and the criteria for each phase.

> The driver for a given release is the set of applications and capabilities that are unlocked by a given feature set; and their importance.

Author: Being able to target a host-provided GC memory will be a huge change from self-implemented GC over linear memory.
Sometimes, performance is the feature that unlocks some capability. But, I concur, mostly.

> The driver for a given release is the set of applications and capabilities that are unlocked by a given feature set; and their importance.

Reviewer 12: This should have some expediency, if it only reduces the code base by 20-30% compared to self-hosted GC, but at the same time significantly slows down the execution of the code, then it will all make no sense. In many languages, GC is tightly integrated with runtime and compiler, and switching to an external wasm GC would be significant effort which which should really be needed.

   
### Non-Goals
1. Support for linear memory GC.

   The focus of this effort is in host-provided GC support. There may be additional efforts aimed at improving the capabilities of WASM to support so-called linear memory GC; but these are outside the scope of this work. 
   
## Criteria

A criterion is intended to act as a metric of a 'soft value', such as 'desireability' or 'implementability'. Criteria are especially important when weighing the relative merits of features and in determining the importance that some scenario is satisfied.

1. Prioriterize features used by popular languages.
   
   When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the languages that are most likely to drive adoption of WASM-GC; this is likely to be the result of a combination of usage of the language and its likelyhood to be used in a WASM-GC engine.
   

> The 2020 StackOverflow survey reported that the [most popular managed memory languages](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2020#technology-most-loved-dreaded-and-wanted-languages-loved) -- from the top 20 -- were Typescript, Python, Kotlin, Go, Julia, Dart, C#, Swift, JavaScript, SQL, Shell, HTML/CSS, Scala, Haskell, R, Java, Ruby, PHP. 

Reviewer 13: Needs indentation to not break numbering

   Within these languages, there are languages which are (largely) statically typed -- such as Java and C# -- and languages that are dynamically typed -- such as Python. We prioriterize statically typed languages over dynamically typed language; because those languages are often more performance sensitive, and because support for statically typed languages can often be used for dynamically typed languages.
   
1. Security is more important than architectural integrity.

1. Architectural integrity is more important than performance.
   'Architectural Integrity' is intended to denote simplicity/coherence of design. Generally speaking, architectural integrity can be measured in terms of the number of concepts and the complexity of their relationships.
      

>    We prioriterize simple, composeable architectures over solution-oriented architectures. This will help to ensure that WASM-GC can evolve and be part of future WASM evolution.

Reviewer 13: "prioritize", here and below

   
   Our reasoning here is that performance is often the result of progressive tuning of an implementation. It can typically be improved over time. On the other hand, architectural deficiencies are very difficult to correct.
      
1. Performance is more important than convenience.

   Since WASM-GC is not intended as a user-facing technology, convenience here refers to the ease with which toolchain authors can target WASM-GC. 
   
   Convenience for toolchain authors is still important however, as that affects adoption of WASM-GC. 

   
## Critical Success Factors

A critical success factor is an aspect or property of possible solutions that may or may not be directly focused on the primary objective, but none-the-less is estimated to be crucially important to the success of the effort.

> 1. Permit ‘cycle detection’ between host structures and language structures; so that such cycles can be collected if there are no other references to them.

Reviewer 13: Consider rewording as "collection of unreachable cycles".  The point is not so much to detect cycles as to collect them.

1. Permit ‘cycle detection’ between host structures and language structures; so that such cycles can be collected if there are no other references to them.

   When a WASM-GC module accesses host capabilities, or when a host application access structures from a WASM-GC library, cross references between them are likely to be established. For example, a DOM node may have an event listener that is actually implemented in WASM. The event listener, in turn, may have a reference to the DOM node it is listening to. This represents a cycle between the host and WASM-GC. If there are no other references to this cycles (if, for example, the DOM node is removed) then the entire cycle must be able to be collected.

1. Performance implications of WASM-GC code should be straightforward.

   A general principle behind WASM itself is that performance should not require special implementation techniques on the part of the engine. I.e., it should not be required that the engine discover particular opportunities for improving performance. In particular, it is the responsibility of languages implementers to generate WASM-GC code that embodies performant strategies.
   

>    For example, if a type cast is potentially eliminatable, then the engine should not be required to discover that fact; rather the toolchain should be able to eliminate the type cast.

Reviewer 14: I generally agree that it is up to language to perform language-level optimizations and thus generate Wasm code that is performant. However I think the way this is phrased (in particular using the word "implementers" versus "implementations" and "toolchain" vs "runtime") gives the impression that this can only be done offline. Whereas I fully expect there will a lot of action building dynamic runtimes on top of Wasm that both dynamically generate code and do dynamic optimizations. So I would propose rephrasing this part a bit to reflect that.

Author: Don't disagree (agree even!). However, some of the examples you raise (JITing) are orthogonal to GC. Will attempt to rephrase.

   
## Criteria

A criterion is intended to act as a metric of a 'soft value', such as 'desireability' or 'implementability'. Criteria are especially important when weighing the relative merits of features and in determining the importance that some scenario is satisfied.

1. Prioriterize popular languages.
   When deciding which features to provide it is important to place emphasis on features that are more likely to be used. We prioriterize support for the popular programming languages.
   
   While it is difficult to be precise about this, one measure is a public index such as the [TIOBE index](https://www.tiobe.com/tiobe-index/). The TIOBE ranking of the top 12 languages with managed memory (from the top 20 languages) is Java, Python, C#, Visual Basic, PHP, SQL, Swift, Go, Ruby, MATLAB, Perl, Scratch.
The 2020 StackOverflow survey reported that the [most popular managed memory languages](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2020#technology-most-loved-dreaded-and-wanted-languages-loved) -- from the top 20 -- were Typescript, Python, Kotlin, Go, Julia, Dart, C#, Swift, JavaScript, SQL, Shell, HTML/CSS, Scala, Haskell, R, Java, Ruby, PHP. 

>    >Interestingly, most of these languages also show up in the most dreaded list!

Reviewer 12: What does this mean? And is this comment really necessary here?
